good of the kind, might not be of some advantage. "Then," says he, "when there, you may make acquaintances, and establish correspondences in the bookselling

and stationery way." I agreed that this might be advantageous. "Then," says he,

"get yourself ready to go with Annis;" which was the annual ship, and the only one at that time usually passing between London and Philadelphia. But it would

be some months before Annis sail'd, so I continued working with Keimer,

fretting about the money Collins had got from me, and in daily apprehensions of

being call'd upon by Vernon, which, however, did not happen for some years
after.

I believe I have omitted mentioning that, in my first voyage from Boston, being

becalm'd off Block Island, our people set about catching cod, and hauled up a great many. Hitherto I had stuck to my resolution of not eating animal food, and

on this occasion I consider'd, with my master Tryon, the taking every fish as a kind of unprovoked murder, since none of them had, or ever could do us any
injury that might justify the slaughter. All this seemed very reasonable. But I had

formerly been a great lover of fish, and, when this came hot out of the frying-pan, it smelt admirably well. I balanc'd some time between principle and

inclination, till I recollected that, when the fish were opened, I saw smaller fish

taken out of their stomachs; then thought I, "If you eat one another, I don't see

why we mayn't eat you." So I din'd upon cod very heartily, and continued to eat

with other people, returning only now and then occasionally to a vegetable diet.

So convenient a thing is it to be a
reasonable creature, since it enables one to find or make a reason for everything one has a mind to do.

[30]
Temple Franklin considered this specific figure vulgar and changed it to "stared with astonishment."

[31]
Pennsylvania and Delaware.

[32]
A peep-show in a box.

[33]
There were no mints in the colonies, so the metal money was of foreign coinage and not nearly so common as paper money, which was printed in large quantities in America, even in small denominations.

[34]
Spanish dollar about equivalent to our dollar.

K EIMER and I liv'd on a pretty good familiar footing, and agreed tolerably well, for he suspected nothing of my setting up. He retained a great
deal of his old enthusiasms and lov'd argumentation. We therefore had many

disputations. I used to work him so with my Socratic method, and had trepann'd

him so often by questions apparently so distant from any point we had in hand,

and yet by degrees led to the point, and brought him into difficulties and
contradictions, that at last he grew ridiculously cautious, and would hardly

answer me the most common question, without asking first, "
What do you intend
to infer from that
?" However, it gave him so high an opinion of my abilities in
the confuting way, that he seriously proposed my being his colleague in a project

he had of setting up a new sect. He was to preach the doctrines, and I was to
confound all opponents. When he came to explain with me upon the doctrines, I

found several conundrums which I objected to, unless I might have my way a little too, and introduce some of mine.

Keimer wore his beard at full length, because somewhere in the Mosaic law it is

said, "
Thou shalt not mar the corners of thy beard
." He likewise kept the
Seventh day, Sabbath; and these two points were essentials with him. I dislik'd
both; but agreed to admit them upon condition of his adopting the doctrine of
using no animal food. "I doubt," said he, "my constitution will not bear that." I
assur'd him it would, and that he would be the better for it. He was usually a
great glutton, and I promised myself some diversion in half starving him. He
agreed to try the practice, if I would keep him company. I did so, and we held it

for three months. We had our victuals dress'd, and brought to us regularly by a

woman in the neighborhood, who had from me a list of forty dishes, to be

prepar'd for us at different times, in all which there was neither fish, flesh, nor
fowl, and the whim suited me the better at this time from the cheapness of it, not

costing us above eighteenpence sterling each per week. I have since kept several

Lents most strictly, leaving the common diet for that, and that for the common,
abruptly, without the least inconvenience, so that I think there is little in the
advice of making those changes by easy gradations. I went on pleasantly, but
poor Keimer suffered grievously, tired of the project, long'd for the flesh-pots of

Egypt, and order'd a roast pig. He invited me and two women friends to dine
with him; but, it being brought too soon upon table, he could not resist the
temptation, and ate the whole before we came.

I had made some courtship during this time to Miss Read. I had a great respect

and affection for her, and had some reason to believe she had the same for me;

but, as I was about to take a long voyage, and we were both very young, only a

little above eighteen, it was thought most prudent by her mother to prevent our
going too far at present, as a marriage, if it was to take place, would be more
convenient after my return, when I should be, as I expected, set up in my
business. Perhaps, too, she thought my expectations not so well founded as I
imagined them to be.

My chief acquaintances at this time were Charles Osborne, Joseph Watson, and

James Ralph, all lovers of reading. The two first were clerks to an eminent
scrivener or conveyancer in the town, Charles Brockden; the other was clerk to a

merchant. Watson was a pious, sensible young man, of great integrity; the others

rather more lax in their principles of religion, particularly Ralph, who, as well as

Collins, had been unsettled by me, for which they both made me suffer. Osborne

was sensible, candid, frank; sincere and affectionate to his friends; but, in literary

matters, too fond of criticizing. Ralph was ingenious, genteel in his manners, and

extremely eloquent; I think I never knew a prettier talker. Both of them were
great admirers of poetry, and began to try their hands in little pieces. Many
pleasant walks we four had together on Sundays into the woods, near Schuylkill,

where we read to one another, and conferr'd on what we read.

Many pleasant walks we four had together

Ralph was inclin'd to pursue the study of poetry, not doubting but he might
become eminent in it, and make his fortune by it, alleging that the best poets
must, when they first began to write, make as many faults as he did. Osborne
dissuaded him, assur'd him he had no genius for poetry, and advis'd him to think

of nothing beyond the business he was bred to; that, in the mercantile way, tho'

he had no stock, he might, by his diligence and punctuality, recommend himself

to employment as a factor, and in time acquire wherewith to trade on his own
account. I approv'd the amusing one's self with poetry now and then, so far as to

improve one's language, but no farther.

On this it was propos'd that we should each of us, at our next meeting, produce a

piece of our own composing, in order to improve by our mutual observations,
criticisms, and corrections. As language and expression were what we had in

view, we excluded all considerations of invention by agreeing that the task

should be a version of the eighteenth Psalm, which describes the descent of a
Deity. When the time of our meeting drew nigh, Ralph called on me first, and let

me know his piece was ready. I told him I had been busy, and, having little
inclination, had done nothing. He then show'd me his piece for my opinion, and I

much approv'd it, as it appear'd to me to have great merit. "Now," says he,

"Osborne never will allow the least merit in anything of mine, but makes 1000

criticisms out of mere envy. He is not so jealous of you; I wish, therefore, you

would take this piece, and produce it as yours; I will pretend not to have had
time, and so produce nothing. We shall then see what he will say to it." It was

agreed, and I immediately transcrib'd it, that it might appear in my own hand.

We met; Watson's performance was read; there were some beauties in it, but

many defects. Osborne's was read; it was much better; Ralph did it justice;
remarked some faults, but applauded the beauties. He himself had nothing to

produce. I was backward; seemed desirous of being excused; had not had

sufficient time to correct, etc.; but no excuse could be admitted; produce I must.

It was read and repeated; Watson and Osborne gave up the contest, and join'd in

applauding it. Ralph only made some criticisms, and propos'd some

amendments; but I defended my text. Osborne was against Ralph, and told him

he was no better a critic than poet, so he dropt the argument. As they two went
home together, Osborne expressed himself still more strongly in favor of what he
thought my production; having restrain'd himself before, as he said, lest I should

think it flattery. "But who would have imagin'd," said he, "that Franklin had been
capable of such a performance; such painting, such force, such fire! He has even

improv'd the original. In his common conversation he seems to have no choice of

words; he hesitates and blunders; and yet, good God! how he writes!" When we

next met, Ralph discovered the trick we had plaid him, and Osborne was a little
laughed at.

This transaction fixed Ralph in his resolution of becoming a poet. I did all I
could to dissuade him from it, but he continued scribbling verses till
Pope cured him.
[35]
He became, however, a pretty good prose writer. More of him hereafter.

But, as I may not have occasion again to mention the other two, I shall just
remark here, that Watson died in my arms a few years after, much lamented,
being the best of our set. Osborne went to the West Indies, where he became an

eminent lawyer and made money, but died young. He and I had made a serious

agreement, that the one who happen'd first to die should, if possible, make a
friendly visit to the other, and acquaint him how he found things in that separate
state. But he never fulfill'd his promise.

[35]
"In one of the later editions of the
Dunciad occur the following lines:

'Silence, ye wolves! while Ralph to Cynthia howls,

And makes night hideous—answer him, ye owls.'

To this the poet adds the following note:...